---
title: "Lifespan - summary"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Podcast
  - Health
---

In this post, we summarize learnings from Lifespan podcast, by David Sinclair and Matthew LaPlante.
They also published a [book](https://www.amazon.com/Lifespan-Sinclair-Matthew-LaPlante-Collection/dp/912419445X)
few years ago on same subject as well.

## TLDR

* Eat less
* Avoid sugar, meat, and processed food (including processed carbs)
* Exercise
* Metformin / berberine for anti-aging
* Use retinoid once a week to prevent wrinkles
* You cannot improve what you cannot measure


## Eat less

Fasting is key mechanism in modern times to let your body activate its defense. Great starting place for most people is
to simply avoid snacking or being full all the time. By being hungry, we activate our anti-aging genes and body's
defense mechanisms.

Multiple fasting options:

* Time-restricted eating - Skip breakfast first, then eventually also lunch (so eating 1 / day)
* Once a week intermittent fasting - Water only fasting on Saturdays to give your body reset

**Notes:**

* I have done fasting at [True North](https://www.healthpromoting.com/) for a week in 2019, had an excellent
experience. Before the fasting retreat I was a heavy meat consumer (typically 2-3 a day), the fasting retreat basically
provided my body a chance to reset. Also it was a necessary step for me to prove I can survive without eating meat (I
have never skipped meat for a day before this day).

## Foods to avoid

The most important point is to avoid sugar and limit carbs. Keeping your blood glucose steady is extremely important 
for longevity and prevent lifestyle related diseases. Here, I used Freestyle Libre 2 CGM (Continuous Glucose Montoring) 
via [ageless.rx](https://agelessrx.com/), you can read my learnings in a separate [post]({% post_url 2023-02-01-CGM %}).

Other takeaways on foods to limit:

* Processed foods (flour, white rice, outmeal, fast food, packaged foods, etc)
* Meat (fish seems to be somewhat exception due to Omega-3)

**Notes**:

* Oatmeal, rice, and bread had quite high impact on my blood glucose during my experiment. As a result, I have
stopped my consumption of oatmeal and bread altogether and largely limiting my rice intake (once a month).

## Exercise for longevity

Combination of cardio and strength training is known to increase lifespan and promote health living. It is critical
to train your hips and larger muscles. Exercise is a natural way to boost our testesterone level as well.

## Metformin and berberine

[Metformin](https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-11285-7061/metformin-oral/metformin-oral/details) has been used for
diabetes treatment for a long time (It's perscription only in US). Berberine, on the other hand, is a supplement.
Those 2 drugs seem to work roughly the same way: activate AMPK, improve insulin sensitivity, and reduce blood glucose.

There are trials ([example](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34421827/)) showing early results on metformin's potential
benefits on increasing lifespan even on patients who do not have diabetes.

## Healthy skin

* Do not smoke or drink - both are terrible for your skin health
* Retinoid is effective for preventing wrinkles but long term effect on longevity is unknown. Best to keep it 1 / week
regime for now
* Use sunscreen everyday
* Measure Vitamin-D levels every year to avoid deficiency due to constant sunscreen use

## Measure what you can

Ultimately, I need to take control of my health and focus on prevention. Unfortunately, US healthcare system is setup
on a foundation that treats patients once sick rather than preventing onset of disease.

By measuring, I know what works and what doesn't. Great example here is my experimentation with GCM, where I
learned foods I've been eating everyday (latte, oatmeal, bread, etc) were consistently spiking my blood glucose.
